



Kingdom of Kanem - World History Encyclopedia
































































































 




Facebook





Membership
No ads













 








Encyclopedia

Index
Timeline
Maps
Book Reviews
Weights & Measures
Translations



Education

Teaching Materials
Link Database
Quizzes
Primary Sources
Collections
School Subscription



Media

Media Library
Audio Articles
Podcast
Youtube Channel



Contribute

Submissions
Needed Content
Style Guide
Terms & Conditions
Volunteer
Donate



Shop

Books
Map Posters
Magazines
Wall Charts
Clothing



About

About
Our Team
Editorial Policy
Annual Reports
Membership
Contact



Login

Login
Register








Kingdom of Kanem









Contents




Definition







by Mark Cartwright
published on 23 April 2019



 








Available in other languages: French, Malay











Mao Oasis, ChadNotrchad (CC BY-SA)



The Kingdom of Kanem (aka Kanim) was an ancient African state located in modern-day Chad, which flourished from the 9th to 14th century CE. With its heartland in the centre of the African continent on the eastern shores of Lake Chad, the kingdom was formed by a confederation of nomadic peoples and then ruled by the Saifawa dynasty. The city prospered thanks to its position as the hub of trade connections with central African peoples, the Nile Valley, and North African states on the other side of the Sahara Desert. The kingdom adopted the Islamic religion after long contact with Muslim clerics and traders from the 11th century CE onwards. In the 1390s CE Kanem's king was forced to flee the invading Bulala people and so set up a new state on the other side of Lake Chad, which would become the Bornu Empire, sometimes known as the Kanem-Bornu Empire, which lasted until the late 19th century CE.
Origins & Formation
The Kingdom of Kanem, located just to the east of Lake Chad in Central Africa, may derive its name from the Teda and Kanuri term for 'south' (anem) which refers to its position in relation to the better-known states to the north. Perhaps, too, the name reflects the oral tradition that the people of Kanem had once migrated from the Sahara Desert following that region's increased desiccation. The process which saw the formation of the kingdom of Kanem is here summarised by the historian P. Curtin:
Remove Ads
Advertisement




Kanem passed through a process of state-building different from that of the western Sudan. The nucleus was a nomadic confederation of peoples speaking separate languages of the Teda-Daza group, probably formed in the 9th century. Nomadic confederations of this kind are common enough in history; the unusual thing is that this one held together. Sometime before the early twelfth century it had become sedentary itself, with Njimi as its permanent capital. (75)

The first mention of Kanem in texts dates to 872 CE and the work of the Arab historian and geographer al-Yaqubi (in his Kitab al-Buldan). Even if the state may have been formed a century earlier, it confirms the above political process as we are informed that the population is still at that time mostly composed of nomads who live in huts of reeds and who have not yet formed permanent settlements. We are also told that the kings of Kanem (here and in other Arab sources called Zaghawa) also ruled over other kings, likely the tribes they had conquered in the region north and east of Lake Chad. The Arab historian al-Muhallabi, writing in the 10th century CE, notes that the kingdom now has two towns and its wealth is evidenced by large herds of cattle, sheep, camels, and horses.



YouTube
Follow us on YouTube!




  


Map of Ancient & Medieval Sub-Saharan African StatesMark Cartwright (CC BY-NC-SA)




Remove Ads
Advertisement



The Kings of Kanem
From c. 1075 CE Kanem was ruled by the Saifawa (aka Sefawa) dynasty over a population which became dominated by the Kanuri people. The king had the title of Mai. One of the greatest kings was Mai Dunama Dibbalemi (r. c. 1221-1259 CE) who expanded the kingdom further north and northeast into the desert, largely thanks to the use of cavalry. Military commanders were rewarded for their service by the award of governorship of conquered regions, and intermarriage between royal houses was a tried and tested strategy to cement new chieftains into the Kanem kingdom. Subjugated tribes were obliged to pay the Kanem kings tribute, typically in the form of slaves.
By the end of the 13th century CE, the kingdom was at its height & even controlled the Fezzan region.
By the end of the 13th century CE, the kingdom was at its height and even controlled the vital Saharan oases of the Fezzan region, although it could not hold on to such a hot property for more than half a century. Dibbalemi was also one of the most vehement opponents of the old pagan religion, the Muslim king ordering the destruction of objects and symbols pertaining to it and imposing features of Islamic law. Nevertheless, the authority of the Kanem kings seems to have been absolute and not entirely in accord with the usual version of Islam, as here recorded by the Arab author Yaqut in his 13th-century CE 'Dictionary of Countries' (Kitab Mu'jam al-Buldan):
Remove Ads
Advertisement




They exalt their king and worship him instead of God. They imagine that he does not eat any food. There are persons who have charge of this food secretly, and bring it to his house. It is not known where it is brought from. If it happens that one of his subjects meets the camels carrying provisions, he is killed instantly on the spot. He drinks his beverage in the presence of his select companions…Their religion is the worship of their kings, for they believe that they bring life and death, sickness and health.
(quoted in Fage, 681) 

Adoption of Islam
It is not clear when the kingdom adopted Islam and under what circumstances except that is was probably not until the early 13th century CE that it was practised widely by the general populace as Arab sources covering before that time specifically state the kingdom was still pagan. The first Kanem ruler who is recorded as being a Muslim was, however, much earlier, one Hu (aka Hawwa, r. 1067-1071 CE) who may actually have been a queen. Thereafter, many Kanem rulers made pilgrimages to Islam's holy sites in North Africa and Arabia. In addition, one king founded a Muslim educational institution (madrasa) at Fustat in Egypt in 1324 CE.


  


Trans-Saharan Camel CaravanHolger Reineccius (CC BY-SA)




The most likely explanation for the kings adopting Islam is that, as in other Sub-Saharan states, this gained them favour with Muslim traders and greater riches with which to impress their people and hold on to power. Alternatively, a new dynasty may have been bolstered in its claims of legitimacy by also adopting a new religion. The dates for the adoption by rulers and the change to the Saifawa dynasty do more or less match. Certainly, there were Muslim clerics who travelled as missionaries - the first visited Kanem as early as the 11th century CE - and so the trade explanation does not provide the full picture of the spread of this religion. Further, the missionaries were well received, at least according to Arab sources, and often given gifts for teaching the Koran such as camels, slaves, and gold and silver coins. Kanem was unusual in that a high number of the ordinary population eventually adopted the religion along with the ruling elite, something which was not the typical case elsewhere.
A Trade Hub
From c. 900 CE the kingdom was the end of a camel caravan route that crossed the Sahara Desert passing trade goods between Tripolitania (modern Libya) and Cairo in North Africa down to Central Africa. This trans-Saharan route was one of the best as it was well-served by the regular oases that dotted the Fezzan region. There was also a route to the east and the Nile Valley via the Kawar salt pans. Salt, copper (also used as a currency), tin (from Nigeria), cotton, hides, kola nuts, ivory, ostrich feathers, camels, and gold passed through the kingdom, as did slaves which were actively seized from neighbouring chiefdoms by the kings of Kanem, or given as tribute as mentioned above. The elite of Kanem spent their accumulated wealth on such imported luxuries as embroidered cloth, silk, jewellery, and iron weapons. Not only material goods but also ideas passed along these trade routes, chief amongst them, as we have seen, was the Islamic religion.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



The Bornu Empire
The Bornu Empire was founded by an exiled king of Kanem, Uma b. Idris, who had been forced to flee following the takeover of that kingdom between 1390 and 1400 CE by the Bulala, a mysterious group who may have been a single tribe or clan group of pastoralists. A contributing factor to the defeat at the hands of the Bulala was the incessant civil wars that had blighted Kanem as the royal family got ever bigger and relations fought over the right to rule.
The ruling dynasty of Kanem, in effect, became the kings of Bornu, although how they imposed themselves on the indigenous So people who inhabited the western shores of Lake Chad is unclear. The So people did eventually assimilate the Kanuri language and culture, and the move was not without its advantages for the Kanem kings as the region west of Lake Chad was much richer in iron deposits. The Bornu Empire, sometimes referred to as the Kanem-Bornu Empire or Borno Empire, had its capital at Gazargamo and grew to control both sides of Lake Chad from the 16th century CE by eventually taking over the old Kanem territory. The empire would endure until the late 19th century CE when it was taken over by the French as they ambitiously sought to build a horizontal line of colonies across Africa.


Did you like this definition?







Related Content
Books
Cite This Work
License



Editorial Review
This article has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards in accordance with our editorial policy.




Remove Ads
Advertisement



 
Bibliography


Curtin, P. African History. Pearson, 1995.


Fage, J.D. (ed). The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press, 2001.


Hrbek, I. (ed). UNESCO General History of Africa, Vol. III, Abridged Edition. University of California Press, 1992.


Ki-Zerbo, J. (ed). UNESCO General History of Africa, Vol. IV, Abridged Edition. University of California Press, 1998.


McEvedy, C. The Penguin Atlas of African History. Penguin Books, 1996.


Oliver, R. (ed). The Cambridge History of Africa, Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press, 2001.


Oliver, R.A. Cambridge Encyclopedia of Africa. Cambridge University Press, 1981.


de Villiers, M. Timbuktu. Walker Books, 2007.


World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.



About the Author



Mark Cartwright


Mark is a full-time author, researcher, historian, and editor. Special interests include art, architecture, and discovering the ideas that all civilizations share. He holds an MA in Political Philosophy and is the WHE Publishing Director. 








Translations
French Malay We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and translate this definition into another language!



Related Content

Filters:
All 
Definitions48
Articles17
Images28
Videos4
Collections1
Teaching Materials1













Definition 
Timbuktu


Timbuktu (Timbuctoo) is a city in Mali, West Africa which was an... 











Definition 
Hausaland


Hausaland, sometimes referred to as the Hausa Kingdoms, was a group... 











Article 
The Spread of Islam in Ancient Africa


Following the conquest of North Africa by Muslim Arabs in the 7th... 











Article 
The Gold Trade of Ancient & Medieval West Africa


West Africa was one of the world's greatest producers of gold in... 











Article 
The Camel Caravans of the Ancient Sahara


The camel caravans which crossed the great dunes of the Sahara... 











Article 
The Salt Trade of Ancient West Africa


Salt from the Sahara desert was one of the major trade goods of... 




1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Next › Last » 








Free for the World, Supported by You
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
Become a Member  
Donate


 

Recommended Books











UNESCO General History of Africa, Vol. III, Abridged Edition: Africa...


Written by El Fasi, M., published by University of California Press (1992)


$30.44















Medieval Africa for Kids: A Captivating Guide to Mansa Musa, the Mali...


Written by History, Captivating, published by Captivating History (2023)


$19.69















African Empires: Volume 1: Your Guide To The Historical Record of Africa...


Written by Martin, J.P., published by Trafford (2016)


$16.99















History of Africa for Kids: A Captivating Guide to African History...


Written by History, Captivating, published by Captivating History (2023)


$32.35






 
World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.


Cite This Work

APA Style


Cartwright, M. (2019, April 23). Kingdom of Kanem.
World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/Kingdom_of_Kanem/ 



Chicago Style


Cartwright, Mark. "Kingdom of Kanem."
World History Encyclopedia. Last modified April 23, 2019.
https://www.worldhistory.org/Kingdom_of_Kanem/.




MLA Style


Cartwright, Mark. "Kingdom of Kanem."
World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia, 23 Apr 2019. Web. 02 Mar 2024.





License & Copyright

Submitted by Mark Cartwright, published on 23 April 2019. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included. Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.






Remove Ads
Advertisement






Add Event Timeline
Visual Timeline


c. 900 - c. 1390
The Kingdom of Kanem flourishes near Lake Chad, Africa.


1067 - 1071
Reign of Hu (aka Hawwa), regarded as the first king (or possibly queen) to adopt Islam in the Kingdom of Kanem.


c. 1075
The Saifawa dynasty begins to rule in the Kingdom of Kanem.


c. 1221 - 1259
Reign of Mai Dunama Dibbalemi, ruler of the Kingdom of Kanem n


c. 1300
The Kingdom of Kanem takes control of the Fezzan oases in the Sahara Desert.


1324
The Kingdom of Kanem near Lake Chad founds a Muslim educational institution (madrasa) at Fustat in Egypt.


c. 1390
The king of Kanem is forced to flee a Bulala invasion and establishes a new kingdom of Bornu further west.





Remove Ads
Advertisement







Free Newsletter
Our latest articles delivered to your inbox, once a week:



Are you a...?

History Enthusiast
Teacher
Student
Librarian













Remove Ads
Advertisement



 















Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including Oxford University.
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education, Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin), Merlot (California State University), OER Commons and the School Library Journal.
Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our old name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.








Our Mission
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.


Follow Us
Facebook












About •
Contact •
Advertise •
Privacy Policy •
Partners •
Supporters •
Newsletter •
Settings





World History Publishing is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.


Some Rights Reserved (2009-2024) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.


The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark.





Featured Partner












 









