



Khmer Empire - World History Encyclopedia


































































































 




Facebook





Membership
No ads













 








Encyclopedia

Index
Timeline
Maps
Book Reviews
Weights & Measures
Translations



Education

Teaching Materials
Link Database
Quizzes
Primary Sources
Collections
School Subscription



Media

Media Library
Audio Articles
Podcast
Youtube Channel



Contribute

Submissions
Needed Content
Style Guide
Terms & Conditions
Volunteer
Donate



Shop

Books
Map Posters
Magazines
Wall Charts
Clothing



About

About
Our Team
Editorial Policy
Annual Reports
Membership
Contact



Login

Login
Register








Khmer Empire









Contents




Definition







by Rodrigo Quijada Plubins
published on 12 March 2013



 








Available in other languages: Czech, French, Malay, Turkish











Khmer Empire c. 900 CEJavierfv1212 (CC BY-SA)



The Khmer Empire was a powerful state in South East Asia, formed by people of the same name, lasting from 802 CE to 1431 CE. At its peak, the empire covered much of what today is Cambodia, Thailand, Laos, and southern Vietnam.
By the 7th century CE, Khmer people inhabited territories along the Mekong river -the world's seventh longest river - from the delta to roughly the modern Cambodia-Laos border, plus the region between that river and the great Tonle Sap lake to the west and the area running along the Tonle Sap river (which runs from the lake to the sea, joining the Mekong in the delta). There were several kingdoms at constant war against each other, with art and culture heavily influenced by India due to long established sea trade routes with that subcontinent.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



Hinduism mostly, but Buddhism as well, were important religions in the region, mixed with animist and traditional cults. Important cities from that time include Angkor Borei, Sambor Prei Kuk, Banteay Prei Nokor and Wat Phu. A man called Jayavarman II, who is said to have come from a place named Java - which may or may not be the island we call Java in Southeast Asia, led a series of successful military campaigns, subjugating most of these petty kingdoms, that resulted in the founding of a large territorial state. In 802 CE he took the title chakravartin, “universal ruler”, and that date is used to signal the start of the empire.



YouTube
Follow us on YouTube!


Several times the Khmer fought wars against two neighboring peoples with powerful kingdoms, the Cham and the Vietnamese.
Using the city of Angkor as capital, for the next centuries the Khmer empire expanded its territorial base, mostly to the north (entering the Khorat plateau) and the west, to the Chao Phraya basin and beyond. To the east outcomes were different: several times the Khmer fought wars against two neighboring peoples with powerful kingdoms, the Cham (in today's central Vietnam) and the Vietnamese (in today's northern Vietnam). Despite some victories, as in 1145 CE, when Cham's capital Vijaya was taken, the empire was never able to annex those lands. Conversely, Chams and Vietnamese enjoyed some victories of their own, the most spectacular of which was Cham's humiliating revenge, looting Angkor (1177 CE) and pushing the empire to the edge of destruction.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



Throughout the empire's history, Khmer's court was repeatedly concerned with putting down rebellions initiated by ambitious nobles trying to achieve independence, or fighting conspiracies against the king. This was particularly true each time a king died, as successions were usually contested.
The Khmer were great builders, filling the landscape with monumental temples, huge reservoirs (called baray) and canals, and laying an extensive road network with all sorts of bridges -the main highways are 800 km long. The most stunning temple, Angkor Wat, is a microcosm of the Hindu universe and defies imagination as the world's largest religious complex - covering 200 hectares; nowadays it is crowded with tourists amazed with ruins that until recently were covered by the jungle. Its construction took some 30 years and was started by one of the greatest kings, Suryavarman II, around 1122 CE.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



The empire's greatest king was Jayavarman VII (r. 1181 CE - 1215 CE). He expelled the Chams who took Angkor, restoring the realm from anarchy, and then invaded Champa (Cham's kingdom). The scale of his construction programme was unprecedented: he built temples, monuments, highways, a hundred hospitals, and the spectacular Angkor Thom complex - a city within a city in Angkor. Jayavarman also expanded the empire's territorial control to its zenith.


  


Angkor Wat, CambodiaDennis Jarvis (CC BY-SA)




Angkor's original name was Yashodharapura (“Glory-bearing city”), and at its apogee it was the biggest city in the world, covering an area of a thousand square kilometres, close to that of modern Los Angeles in the USA. Its population is much harder to estimate, but a figure of aproximately one million is acceptable.
The Khmer were festive people, with many celebrations all the year round. Wrestling, horse races, cock fights, fireworks, music and dances were an integral part of their culture. Most of the realm's commerce was apparently in the hands of women.The king and the elite were transported on palanquins, and used umbrellas to cover from the sun. There were several religious beliefs present, with Hinduism being favoured (yet not exclusively) by the the kings at first, and Buddhism later. The state was divided into approximately 23 provinces, with a sophisticated administration and extensive personnel going down even to the village level. Censuses were carried out periodically. Although key to the empire's prosperity, the high officers of this bureaucracy were also part of the plots that plagued the court's history.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



The empire's decline and final collapse is deeply connected with the great Thai migration of the 12th-14th centuries CE. They inhabitated an area to the north of the empire, roughly where China ends and Southeast Asia begins; the Yunnan. It is a mountainous, harsh land, where a Thai kingdom called Nanchao existed. For unknown reasons, Thai populations started migrating south, in small groups at first. Thais first appear in records as as hired mercenaries for the empire, and their numbers rose as they began to establish themselves as settlers in marginal areas. The migration intensified when Mongol campaigns shook China, and when the Mongols took Yunnan in 1253 CE, further pressure for Thai migration ensued. Eventually the Thai created their own small kingdoms, the most important of them in the western side of the empire. As these kingdoms grew in power, they started to attack and annex imperial territories. The empire's economy by this time may also have been deteriorated by increased silting of the massive water works that the Khmer core area depended on. The Thai kingdom of Ayutthaya took Angkor in 1431 CE, which constitutes the end of the Khmer empire.


Did you like this definition?







Related Content
Books
Cite This Work
License



Editorial Review
This article has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards in accordance with our editorial policy.




Remove Ads
Advertisement



 
Bibliography


Coe, M.E. Angkor and the Khmer Civilization. Thames & Hudson, 2005.


Freeman, M. Ancient Angkor. River Books, 2007.


Villiers, J. Historia universal / 18 / Asia sudoriental. Antes de la epoca colonial. Siglo XXI Editores Mexico, 1985.


World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.



Translations
Czech French Malay Turkish We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and translate this definition into another language!



Related Content

Filters:
All 
Definitions37
Articles34
Images19
3D Images1
Videos3
Collections4
Teaching Materials1













Definition 
Angkor Wat


Angkor Wat is a temple complex in the province of Siem Reap, Cambodia... 











Image 
Angkor Wat, Cambodia


The Hindu temple complex of Angkor Wat built from 1122 CE under... 











Definition 
Sukhothai


Sukhothai or Sukhothai Historical Park was the former capital of... 











Article 
The Temple of the Emerald Buddha


A small carved figurine sits high on a grand multi-tiered pedestal... 











Image 
Angkor Wat Temple Complex


Angkor Wat temple complex, Cambodia. 











Article 
Ayutthaya: Venice of the East


The royal city of Ayutthaya (ah-you-tah-ya) was a small kingdom... 




1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Next › Last » 








Free for the World, Supported by You
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
Become a Member  
Donate


 

Recommended Books











Angkor and the Khmer Civilization


Written by Coe, Michael D. & Evans, Damian, published by Thames & Hudson (2018)


$36.75















Empire of the Winds: The Global Role of Asia’s Great Archipelago


Written by Bowring, Philip, published by Bloomsbury Academic (2020)


$27.85















Empire of the Sikhs: Revised edition


Written by Singh, Patwant & Rai, Jyoti M., published by Peter Owen Publishers (2013)


$28.86















Cambodian History: A Captivating Guide to the History of Cambodia and...


Written by History, Captivating, published by Captivating History (2021)


$14.76















Empire khmer: Aide-Mémoire : Public, Étudiants, Compatriotes, Archéologues...


Written by IM, Bounheng, published by Independently published (2023)


$10.00






 
World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.


Cite This Work

APA Style


Plubins, R. Q. (2013, March 12). Khmer Empire.
World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/Khmer_Empire/ 



Chicago Style


Plubins, Rodrigo Quijada. "Khmer Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. Last modified March 12, 2013.
https://www.worldhistory.org/Khmer_Empire/.




MLA Style


Plubins, Rodrigo Quijada. "Khmer Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia, 12 Mar 2013. Web. 03 Mar 2024.





License & Copyright

Submitted by Rodrigo Quijada Plubins, published on 12 March 2013. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included. Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.






Remove Ads
Advertisement






Add Event Timeline
Visual Timeline


802 - 1431
Khmer Empire in South East Asia.


1122
Construction begins of the Hindu temple at Angkor Wat.


1177
Angkor, Khmer capital, looted by Chams.


1181 - 1215
Reign of Jayavarman VII, greatest Khmer king.





Remove Ads
Advertisement







Free Newsletter
Our latest articles delivered to your inbox, once a week:



Are you a...?

History Enthusiast
Teacher
Student
Librarian













Remove Ads
Advertisement



 















Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including Oxford University.
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education, Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin), Merlot (California State University), OER Commons and the School Library Journal.
Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our old name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.








Our Mission
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.


Follow Us
Facebook












About •
Contact •
Advertise •
Privacy Policy •
Partners •
Supporters •
Newsletter •
Settings





World History Publishing is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.


Some Rights Reserved (2009-2024) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.


The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark.





Featured Partner












 









