



Roman Empire - World History Encyclopedia






































































































 




Facebook





Membership
No ads













 








Encyclopedia

Index
Timeline
Maps
Book Reviews
Weights & Measures
Translations



Education

Teaching Materials
Link Database
Quizzes
Primary Sources
Collections
School Subscription



Media

Media Library
Audio Articles
Podcast
Youtube Channel



Contribute

Submissions
Needed Content
Style Guide
Terms & Conditions
Volunteer
Donate



Shop

Books
Map Posters
Magazines
Wall Charts
Clothing



About

About
Our Team
Editorial Policy
Annual Reports
Membership
Contact



Login

Login
Register








Roman Empire









Contents




Definition







by Joshua J. Mark
published on 22 March 2018



 





 


Available in other languages: French, Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Turkish











The Provinces of the Roman Empire under AugustusSimeon Netchev (CC BY-NC-SA)



The Roman Empire, at its height (c. 117), was the most extensive political and social structure in western civilization. Building upon the foundation laid by the Roman Republic, the empire became the largest and most powerful political and military entity in the world up to its time and expanded steadily until its fall, in the west, in 476.
By 285, the empire had grown too vast to be ruled from the central government at Rome and so was divided by Emperor Diocletian (r. 284-305) into a Western and an Eastern Empire. The empire began when Augustus Caesar (r. 27 BCE-14 CE) became the first emperor of Rome and ended, in the west, when the last Roman emperor, Romulus Augustulus (r. 475-476), was deposed by the Germanic King Odoacer (r. 476-493). In the east, it continued as the Byzantine Empire until the death of Constantine XI (r. 1449-1453) and the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453. The influence of the Roman Empire on western civilization was profound in its lasting contributions to virtually every aspect of western culture.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



The Early Dynasties
Following the Battle of Actium in 31 BCE, Gaius Octavian Thurinus, Julius Caesar's nephew and heir, became the first emperor of Rome and took the name Augustus Caesar. Although Julius Caesar is often regarded as the first emperor of Rome, this is incorrect; he never held the title `Emperor' but, rather, `Dictator', a title the Senate could not help but grant him, as Caesar held supreme military and political power at the time. In contrast, the Senate willingly granted Augustus the title of emperor, lavishing praise and power on him because he had destroyed Rome's enemies and brought much-needed stability.



YouTube
Follow us on YouTube!


Augustus: "I found Rome a city of clay but left it a city of marble."
Augustus ruled the empire from 27 BCE until 14 CE when he died. In that time, as he said himself, he "found Rome a city of clay but left it a city of marble." Augustus reformed the laws of the city and, by extension, the empire's, secured Rome's borders, initiated vast building projects (carried out largely by his faithful general Agrippa (l. 63-12 BCE), who built the first Pantheon), and secured the empire a lasting name as one of the greatest, if not the greatest, political and cultural powers in history. The Pax Romana (Roman Peace), also known as the Pax Augusta, which he initiated, was a time of peace and prosperity hitherto unknown and would last over 200 years.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



Following Augustus' death, power passed to his heir, Tiberius (r. 14-37), who continued many of the emperor's policies but lacked the strength of character and vision which so defined Augustus. This trend would continue, more or less steadily, with the emperors who followed: Caligula (r. 37-41), Claudius (r. 41-54), and Nero (r. 54-68). These first five rulers of the empire are referred to as the Julio-Claudian Dynasty for the two family names they descended from (either by birth or through adoption), Julius and Claudius.
Although Caligula has become notorious for his depravity and apparent insanity, his early rule was commendable as was that of his successor, Claudius, who expanded Rome's power and territory in Britain; less so was that of Nero. Caligula and Claudius were both assassinated in office (Caligula by his Praetorian Guard and Claudius, apparently, by his wife). Nero's suicide ended the Julio-Claudian Dynasty and initiated the period of social unrest known as The Year of the Four Emperors.
Remove Ads
Advertisement




These four rulers were Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian. Following Nero's suicide in 68 , Galba assumed rule (69) and almost instantly proved unfit for the responsibility. He was assassinated by the Praetorian Guard. Otho succeeded him swiftly on the very day of his death, and ancient records indicate he was expected to make a good emperor. General Vitellius, however, sought power for himself and so initiated the brief civil war which ended in Otho's suicide and Vitellius' ascent to the throne.
Vitellius proved no more fit to rule than Galba had been, as he almost instantly engaged in luxurious entertainments and feasts at the expense of his duties. The legions declared for General Vespasian as emperor and marched on Rome. Vitellius was murdered by Vespasian's men, and Vespasian (r. 69-79) took power exactly one year from the day Galba had first ascended to the throne.
Vespasian founded the Flavian Dynasty which was characterized by massive building projects, economic prosperity, and expansion of the empire. Vespasian's reign was prosperous as evidenced by his building projects which included initial construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre (the famous Coliseum of Rome) which his son Titus (r. 79-81) would complete. Titus' early reign saw the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 which buried the cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum.
Remove Ads
Advertisement





  


Roman Emperor Domitian, LouvreMary Harrsch (Photographed at the Musée de Louvre) (CC BY-NC-SA)




Ancient sources are universal in their praise for his handling of this disaster as well as the great fire of Rome in 80. Titus died of a fever in 81 and was succeeded by his brother Domitian (r. 81-96). Domitian expanded and secured the boundaries of Rome, repaired the damage to the city caused by the great fire, continued the building projects initiated by his brother, and improved the economy of the empire. Even so, his autocratic methods and policies made him unpopular with the Roman Senate, and he was assassinated in 96.
The Five Good Emperors
Domitian's successor was his advisor Nerva who founded the Nervan-Antonin Dynasty which ruled Rome 96-192. This period is marked by increased prosperity owing to the rulers known as The Five Good Emperors of Rome. Between 96 and 180, five exceptional men ruled in sequence and brought the Roman Empire to its height:

Nerva (r. 96-98)
Trajan (r. 98-117)
Hadrian (r. 117-138)
Antoninus Pius (r. 138-161)
Marcus Aurelius (r. 161-180)

Under their leadership, the Roman Empire grew stronger, more stable, and expanded in size and scope. Lucius Verus and Commodus are the last two of the Nervan-Antonin Dynasty. Verus was co-emperor with Marcus Aurelius until his death in 169 and seems to have been fairly ineffective. Commodus (r. 180-192), Aurelius' son and successor, was one of the most disgraceful emperors Rome ever saw and is universally depicted as indulging himself and his whims at the expense of the empire. He was strangled by his wrestling partner in his bath in 192, ending the Nervan-Antonin Dynasty and raising the prefect Pertinax (who most likely engineered Commodus' assassination) to power.
Remove Ads
Advertisement





  


Pompeii and Mt. Vesuviusmchen007 (Copyright)




The Severan Dynasty
Pertinax governed for only three months before he was assassinated. He was followed, in rapid succession, by four others in the period known as The Year of the Five Emperors, which culminated in the rise of Septimus Severus to power. Severus (r. 193-211), founded the Severan Dynasty, defeated the Parthians, and expanded the empire. His campaigns in Africa and Britain were extensive and costly and would contribute to Rome's later financial difficulties. He was succeeded by his sons Caracalla and Geta, until Caracalla had his brother murdered.


  


Roman Beach AttackThe Creative Assembly (Copyright)




Caracalla ruled until 217, when he was assassinated by his bodyguard. It was under Caracalla's reign that Roman citizenship was expanded to include all free men within the empire. This law was said to have been enacted as a means of raising tax revenue, simply because, after its passage, there were more people the central government could tax. The Severan Dynasty continued, largely under the guidance and manipulation of Julia Maesa (referred to as "empress"), until the assassination of Alexander Severus (r. 222-235) in 235 which plunged the empire into the chaos known as The Crisis of the Third Century (lasting from 235-284).
Two Empires: East & West
This period, also known as The Imperial Crisis, was characterized by constant civil war, as various military leaders fought for control of the empire. The crisis has been further noted by historians for widespread social unrest, economic instability (fostered, in part, by the devaluation of Roman currency by the Severans), and, finally, the dissolution of the empire which broke into three separate regions. The empire was reunited by Aurelian (270-275) whose policies were further developed and improved upon by Diocletian who established the Tetrarchy (the rule of four) to maintain order throughout the empire.
Love History?
Sign up for our free weekly email newsletter!






The Imperial Crisis was characterized by constant civil war, as various military leaders fought for control of the empire.
Even so, the empire was still so vast that Diocletian divided it in half in c. 285 to facilitate more efficient administration by elevating one of his officers, Maximian (r. 286-305) to the position of co-emperor. In so doing, he created the Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire (also known as the Byzantine Empire). Since a leading cause of the Imperial Crisis was a lack of clarity in succession, Diocletian decreed that successors must be chosen and approved from the outset of an individual's reign. Two of these successors were the generals Maxentius and Constantine. Diocletian voluntarily retired from rule in 305, and the tetrarchy dissolved as rival regions of the empire vied with each other for dominance. Following Diocletian's death in 311, Maxentius and Constantine plunged the empire again into civil war.
Constantine & Christianity
In 312, Constantine defeated Maxentius at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge and became sole emperor of both the Western and Eastern Empires (ruling from 306-337 but holding supreme power 324-307). Believing that Jesus Christ was responsible for his victory, Constantine initiated a series of laws such as the Edict of Milan (313) which mandated religious tolerance throughout the empire and, specifically, tolerance for the faith which came to known as Christianity.


  


The Colossus of ConstantineDana Murray (CC BY-NC-SA)




In the same way that earlier Roman emperors had claimed a special relationship with a deity to augment their authority and standing (Caracalla with Serapis, for example, or Diocletian with Jupiter), Constantine chose the figure of Jesus Christ. At the First Council of Nicea (325), he presided over the gathering to codify the faith and decide on important issues such as the divinity of Jesus and which manuscripts would be collected to form the book known today as The Bible. He stabilized the empire, revalued the currency, and reformed the military, as well as founding the city he called New Rome on the site of the former city of Byzantium (modern-day Istanbul) which came to be known as Constantinople.
He is known as Constantine the Great owing to later Christian writers who saw him as a mighty champion of their faith but, as has been noted by many historians, the honorific could as easily be attributed to his religious, cultural, and political reforms, as well as his skill in battle and his large-scale building projects. After his death, his sons inherited the empire and, fairly quickly, embarked on a series of conflicts with each other which threatened to undo all that Constantine had accomplished.
His three sons, Constantine II, Constantius II, and Constans divided the Roman Empire between them but soon fell to fighting over which of them deserved more. In these conflicts, Constantine II and Constans were killed. Constantius II died later after naming his cousin Julian his successor and heir. Emperor Julian ruled for only two years (361-363) and, in that time, tried to return Rome to her former glory through a series of reforms aimed at increasing efficiency in government.
As a Neo-Platonic philosopher, Julian rejected Christianity and blamed the faith, and Constantine's advocacy for it, for the decline of the empire. While officially proclaiming a policy of religious tolerance, Julian systematically removed Christians from influential government positions, banned the teaching and spread of the religion, and barred Christians from military service. His death, while on campaign against the Persians, ended the dynasty Constantine had begun. He was the last pagan emperor of Rome and came to be known as `Julian the Apostate' for his opposition to Christianity.


  


Byzantine Empire c. 460 CETataryn77 (CC BY-SA)




After the brief rule of Jovian, who re-established Christianity as the dominant faith of the empire and repealed Julian's various edicts, the responsibility of emperor fell to Theodosius I. Theodosius I (r. 379-395) took Constantine's and Jovian's religious reforms to their natural ends, outlawed pagan worship throughout the empire, closed the schools and universities, and converted pagan temples into Christian churches after proclaiming Christianity Rome's state religion in 380.
The unity of social duties & religious belief which paganism provided was severed by the institution of Christianity.
It was during this time that Plato's famous Academy was closed by Theodosius' decree. Many of his reforms were unpopular with both the Roman aristocracy and the common people who held to the traditional values of pagan practice. The unity of social duties and religious belief which paganism provided was severed by the institution of a religion which removed the gods from the earth and human society and proclaimed only one God who ruled from the heavens.
This new god, unlike the gods of old, had no special interest in Rome - he was the god of all people - and this distanced the religion of Rome from the state of Rome. Previously, Roman religious belief was state-sponsored and the rituals and festivals went to enhancing the status of the government. Theodosius I devoted so much effort to promoting Christianity that he seems to have neglected other duties as emperor and would be the last to rule both Eastern and Western Empires.


  


The Fall of the Western Roman Empire, c. 480 CESimeon Netchev (CC BY-NC-SA)




The Fall of the Roman Empire
From 376-382, Rome fought a series of battles against invading Goths known today as the Gothic Wars. At the Battle of Adrianople, 9 August 378, the Roman Emperor Valens (r. 364-378) was defeated, and historians mark this event as pivotal in the decline of the Western Roman Empire. Various theories have been suggested as to the cause of the empire's fall but, even today, there is no universal agreement on what those specific factors were. Edward Gibbon has famously argued in his The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire that Christianity played a pivotal role, in that the new religion undermined the social mores of the empire which paganism provided.
The theory that Christianity was a root cause in the empire's fall was debated long before Gibbon, however, as the theologian Orosius (l. c. 5th century) argued Christianity's innocence in Rome's decline as early as 418. Orosius claimed it was primarily paganism itself and pagan practices which brought about the fall of Rome. Other contributing factors to Rome's fall include:

Political instability due to size of empire
The self-interest of the two halves of the empire
Invasion of barbarian tribes
Government corruption
Mercenary armies
Over-reliance on slave labor
Massive unemployment and inflation

The ungovernable vastness of the empire, even divided in two, made it difficult to manage. The Eastern Empire flourished while the Western Empire struggled and neither gave much thought to helping the other. Eastern and Western Rome saw each other more as competitors than teammates and worked primarily in their own self-interest. The growing strength of the Germanic tribes and their constant incursions into Rome could have been dealt with more effectively if not for government corruption, especially among provincial governors, and fair treatment of the Goths by the Romans overall.
The Roman military, manned largely with barbarian mercenaries who had no ethnic ties to Rome, could no longer safeguard the borders as efficiently as they once had nor could the government as easily collect taxes in the provinces. Further, the debasement of the currency, begun under the Severan Dynasty, had steadily encouraged inflation while widespread slave labor deprived lower-class citizens of jobs and increased unemployment levels. The arrival of the Visigoths in the empire in the third century, fleeing from the invading Huns, and their subsequent rebellions has also been cited as a contributing factor in the decline.


  


Invasions of the Roman EmpireMapMaster (CC BY-SA)




The Western Roman Empire officially ended 4 September 476, when Emperor Romulus Augustulus was deposed by the Germanic King Odoacer (though some historians date the end as 480 with the death of Julius Nepos). The Eastern Roman Empire continued on as the Byzantine Empire until 1453, and though known early on as simply "the Roman Empire", it did not much resemble that entity at all. The Western Roman Empire would become re-invented later as The Holy Roman Empire (962-1806), but that construct, also, was far removed from the Roman Empire of antiquity and was an "empire" in name only.
Legacy of the Roman Empire
The inventions and innovations which were generated by the Roman Empire profoundly altered the lives of the ancient people and continue to be used in cultures around the world today. Advancements in the construction of roads and buildings, indoor plumbing, aqueducts, and even fast-drying cement were either invented or improved upon by the Romans.
The calendar used in the West derives from the one created by Julius Caesar, and the names of the days of the week (in the romance languages) and months of the year also come from Rome. Even the practice of returning some purchase one finds one does not want comes from Rome whose laws made it legal for a consumer to bring back some defective or unwanted merchandise to the seller.
Apartment complexes (known as insula), public toilets, locks and keys, newspapers, even socks all were developed by the Romans as were shoes, a postal system (modeled after the Persians), cosmetics, the magnifying glass, and the concept of satire in literature. During the time of the empire, significant developments were also advanced in the fields of medicine, law, religion, government, and warfare.
The Romans were adept at borrowing from, and improving upon, those inventions or concepts they found among the indigenous populace of the regions they conquered. It is therefore difficult to say what is an "original" Roman invention and what is an innovation on a pre-existing concept, technique, or tool. It can safely be said, however, that the Roman Empire left an enduring legacy which continues to affect the way in which people live in the present day.

Image Gallery
Ancient Rome in 8 Infographics
The culture of ancient Rome intricately blended laws, military values, and cultural innovations to lay the groundwork for a civilization that endured...



Did you like this definition?







Related Content
Books
Cite This Work
License



Editorial Review
This article has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards in accordance with our editorial policy.




Remove Ads
Advertisement




Map






 
Bibliography


Adkins, L. & Adkins, R. A. Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome. Oxford University Press, 1998.


Durant, W. Caesar and Christ. Simon & Schuster, 1980.


Gibbon, E. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Penguin, 2000.


Grant, M. Readings in the Classical Historians. Scribner, 1993.


Grant, M. The Climax of Rome. Weidenfeld, London, 1993.


Harvey, B. K. Daily Life in Ancient Rome. Focus, 2016.


Herwig, W. History of the Goths. University of California Press, 1988.


Kelly, C. The Roman Empire. Oxford University Press, 2006.


Lewis, J. E. The Mammoth Book of Eyewitness Ancient Rome. Running Press, 2003.


Mellor, R. The Historians of Ancient Rome. Routledge, 2012.


Polybius. The Rise of the Roman Empire. Penguin Classics, 1980.


Tacitus. Annals of Tacitus. Cambridge University Press, 2001.


The Roman EmpireAccessed 1 Dec 2016.


Titus Livy. Livy's Histories. Penguin Classics, 2002.


World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.



About the Author



Joshua J. Mark


Joshua J. Mark is World History Encyclopedia's co-founder and Content Director. He was previously a professor at Marist College (NY) where he taught history, philosophy, literature, and writing. He has traveled extensively and lived in Greece and Germany. 






Translations
French Greek Italian Portuguese Russian Spanish Turkish We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and translate this definition into another language!


Questions & Answers

What are the dates of the Roman Empire?
The Roman Empire began in 27 BCE and, in the West, ended in 476 CE; in the East, it ended in 1453 CE.
Who was the first emperor of Rome?
Augustus Caesar was the first emperor of Rome, reigning 27 BCE-14 CE.
Who were the Five Good Emperors of Rome?
The Five Good Emperors of Rome were: Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius who reigned between 96-180 CE.
Why did the Roman Empire fall?
The Roman Empire in the West declined and fell in 476 CE for many reasons including: political instability, religious/cultural instability, government corruption, over-reliance on slave labor, mercenary armies, unemployment and inflation, and invasions by barbarian tribes. In the East, the empire fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 CE.





Related Content

Filters:
All 
Definitions66
Articles22
Images4
Videos4
Collections1
Teaching Materials2













Definition 
Ambiorix


Ambiorix (c. 54/53 BCE) was the co-ruler of the Eburone tribe of... 











Definition 
Germanicus


Germanicus (15 BCE - 19 CE) was a commander in the Roman Empire... 











Definition 
Tiridates I of Armenia


Tiridates I (Trdat I) ruled as the king of Armenia from 63 to either... 











Definition 
Ancient Armenia


Ancient Armenia, located in the south Caucasus area of Eurasia... 











Definition 
Pax Romana


The Pax Romana (Roman Peace) was a period of relative peace and... 











Definition 
Arsacid Dynasty of Armenia


The Arsacid (Arshakuni) dynasty of Armenia ruled that kingdom from... 




1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Next › Last » 








Free for the World, Supported by You
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
Become a Member  
Donate


 

Recommended Books











Fighting Techniques of the Ancient World 3000 BCE–500CE: Equipment...


Written by Anglim, Simon, published by Amber Books (2013)


$17.00















The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 


Written by Gibbon, Edward & Mueller, Hans-Friedrich & Piranesi, Gian Battista & Boorstin, Daniel J., published by Modern Library (2003)


$17.00















The Mammoth Book of Eyewitness Ancient Rome: The History of the Rise...


Written by Lewis, Jon E., published by Running Press (2003)


$23.71















The Roman Empire: A Very Short Introduction


Written by Kelly, Christopher, published by Oxford University Press (2006)


$12.99















Caesar and Christ 


Written by Durant, Will, published by Simon & Schuster (1980)


$64.54






 
World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.


Add External Link
External Links



Roman Empire - KS2 History - BBC Bitesize 


bbc.com 


Interactive Map of the Roman Empire and Celtic Lands 


resourcesforhistory.com 


40 maps that explain the Roman Empire 


vox.com 


following hadrian photography 


followinghadrianphotography.com 


The Fall of Rome Podcast 


wordpress.com 


ORBIS: The Stanford Geospatial Network Model of the Roman World 


stanford.edu 


The History of Rome 


typepad.com 


Rome Project 


dalton.org 


10 Innovations That Built Ancient Rome 


history.com 


mariamilani Ancient Rome 


mariamilani.com 


Smith College Museum of Ancient Inventions: Sarculum 


smith.edu 


Inventions and Discoveries 


weebly.com 


What was it like in Roman Britain? 


bbc.com 


The Roman Army and warfare 


historylearningsite.co.uk 


mariamilani Ancient Rome 


mariamilani.com 


Medicine and Health in Ancient Rome 


unrv.com 


Account Suspended 


the-romans.co.uk 


15 Interesting Women of Ancient Rome 


listverse.com 


What was life like in ancient Rome? 


bbc.com 


7 Major Emperors During the Rise of the Roman Empire 


norwich.edu 


The Roman Empire | The Complete Illustrated History 


roman-empire.net 


List of Rulers of the Roman Empire | Lists of Rulers | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History | The Metropolitan Museum of Art 


metmuseum.org 


The Roman Empire (27 B.C.–393 A.D.) | Essay | The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History 


metmuseum.org 
 


Cite This Work

APA Style


Mark, J. J. (2018, March 22). Roman Empire.
World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/Roman_Empire/ 



Chicago Style


Mark, Joshua J.. "Roman Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. Last modified March 22, 2018.
https://www.worldhistory.org/Roman_Empire/.




MLA Style


Mark, Joshua J.. "Roman Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia, 22 Mar 2018. Web. 03 Mar 2024.





License & Copyright

Submitted by Joshua J. Mark, published on 22 March 2018. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike. This license lets others remix, tweak, and build upon this content non-commercially, as long as they credit the author and license their new creations under the identical terms. When republishing on the web a hyperlink back to the original content source URL must be included. Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.






Remove Ads
Advertisement






Add Event Timeline
Visual Timeline


753 BCE
The legendary founding date of Rome.


212 BCE
The Romans conquer Saguntum from the Carthaginians.


206 BCE - 205 BCE
The Romans conquer Gades. End of the Carthaginian presence on the Iberian Peninsula.


191 BCE
Delphi comes under Roman control.


c. 191 BCE
The Achaean League signs a treaty of alliance with Rome.


188 BCE
Rome gives Samos its independence.


166 BCE
Rome gives dominion over the Cyclades to Athens.


c. 150 BCE
Macedonia becomes a Roman province.


150 BCE
The Lusitani are betrayed and slaughtered by the Romans.


148 BCE
Corcyra is made part of the Roman province of Macedonia.


146 BCE
Thessalonica is made the captial of the Roman province of Macedon.


146 BCE
End of the Third Punic War. Carthage is destroyed and its lands become the Roman province Africa.


146 BCE
Utica is made the capital of the Roman province of Africa.


133 BCE
Lydia and its captial Sardis comes under Roman rule.


129 BCE
Samos becomes part of the Roman province of Asia.


96 BCE
Cyrenaica becomes a Roman province.


74 BCE
The city of Cyrene comes under Roman control.


64 BCE
Tyre becomes a Roman colony.


64 BCE
Byblos conquered by the Roman general Pompey the Great.


63 BCE
Jerash in Jordan becomes part of the Roman province of Syria.


48 BCE
Butrint formally becomes a Roman colony.


44 BCE
Julius Caesar founds the Roman colony of Corinth.


41 BCE
Rome takes control over Naxos in the Cyclades.


37 BCE - 4 BCE
Reign of Herod the Great over Judea.


31 BCE
Octavian uses Corcyra as a Roman naval base.


30 BCE
Egypt becomes province of the Roman Empire.


27 BCE
Philippi gains the honorary title of Colonia Iulia Augusta Philippensis.


c. 27 BCE
Augustus makes Gortyn the capital of the Roman province of Crete & Cyrene.


27 BCE - 19 BCE
Cantabrian Wars: Roman conquest of the Iberian Penninsula.


25 BCE
Galatia is peacefully absorbed into the Roman Empire.


14 BCE - 96 CE
Rome launches an extensive cultural patronage and construction programme in Iberia.


1 CE - 100 CE
Mithraism spreads in the Roman empire.


6 CE
Publius Quinctilius Varus is made governor of Germania.


9 CE
The Rhine River is established as the boundary between the Latin and German speaking worlds, following the defeat of the Roman army, under the command of Varus, at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest.


30 CE - 476 CE
Egypt remains a province of the Roman Empire.


43 CE
Romans invade Britain under Aulus Plautius.


43 CE
Claudius commences the Roman conquest of Britain.


43 CE - 47 CE
Romans conquer South Britain and claim the territory as part of Roman Empire.


44 CE
Caesarea made capital of imperial province.


47 CE - 50 CE
Londinium (London) founded, roads constructed.


51 CE
Briton rebel leader Caratacus defeated, rebellion crushed.


54 CE - 60 CE
Roman general Corbulo successfully campaigns in Armenia.


68 CE - 69 CE
Year of the Four Emperors: Civil war in Rome.


75 CE - 77 CE
Romans defeat the last of the Northern tribes; Roman conquest of Britain complete.


76 CE - 138 CE
Life of Emperor Hadrian.


85 CE - 86 CE
Dacians invade Moesia and defeat the Romans.


86 CE
The Roman general Cornelius Fuscus invades Dacia. He is ambushed and his army is annihilated.


88 CE
Resolved to avenge Fuscus' defeat, Domitian sends another army to Dacia under Tettius Iulianus. This general is victorious on the mountainous pass of Tapae, in the south-west of modern Romania.


101 CE - 106 CE
Trajan conquers Dacia.


106 CE
Jerash in Jordan becomes part of the Roman province of Arabia.


115 CE - 117 CE
Rome occupies Mesopotamia.


116 CE
Invasion and annexation of the Fertile Crescent region by Rome under Trajan.


11 Aug 117 CE - 10 Jul 138 CE
Reign of Roman Emperor Hadrian.


121 CE - 125 CE
First trip of Hadrian around the Empire: Gaul, Germania, Noricum, Britain, Cappadocia, Galatia, Bithynia, Asia, Greece, Moesia, Dacia, and Pannonia.


26 Apr 121 CE - 17 Mar 180 CE
Life of Marcus Aurelius.


142 CE
The Antonine Wall built under Antoninus Pius, north of Hadrian's Wall.


165 CE - 167 CE
Plague epidemic in the Roman empire.


167 CE
Marcomanni sack Aquileia.


167 CE - 180 CE
Marcomannic Wars.


168 CE
Germanic tribes cross the Danube into the Roman Empire.


192 CE
Emperor Commodus is murdered, civil war ensues (until 197 CE).


195 CE
First Parthian war.


197 CE - 198 CE
Second Parthian war.


198 CE - 209 CE
Reign of Caracalla with his father Septimius Severus.


200 CE
Completion of the Roman road system.


c. 204 CE - 270 CE
Life of Plotinus.


209 CE - Dec 211 CE
Reign of Caracalla with his father Septimius Severus and his brother Geta (Feb - Dec 211 only with Geta).


212 CE
Caracalla's edict grants Roman citizenship to all free inhabitants of the Roman Empire.


212 CE
Rome withdraws from region of Scotland.


212 CE
Roman citizenship granted to all inhabitants of the empire.


232 CE
Emperor Maximinus Thrax commands a legion in Egypt.


234 CE
Emperor Maximinus Thrax is governor of Mesopotamia.


238 CE
Year of the Six Emperors in the Roman Empire.


242 CE
Osroene, with its capital at Edessa, is made into a Roman province.


250 CE
Thessalonica is made a Roman colony.


260 CE
Shapur I captures the Roman emperor Valerian at Edessa.


261 CE
Thugga is made a Roman colonia.


262 CE - 266 CE
Odaenathus expels Persian garrisons and restores Syria and Armenia to the Roman Empire. Odaenathus invades Mesopotamia, and inflicts two defeats upon Shapur I, which ends with the sack of Ctesiphon.


Sep 270 CE - c. Sep 275 CE
Reign of Roman emperor Aurelian.


271 CE
Aurelian defends the Roman Empire against Juthungi, Alamanni, and Marcomanni incursions.


272 CE - 273 CE
Aurelian successfully campaigns against Palmyra.


285 CE
The Roman empire is split into the Western and Eastern Roman empires.


312 CE
Roman emperor Constantine I tolerates Christianity.


337 CE
Ascension of Constantius II.


337 CE
Death of Emperor Constantine I.


361 CE
Death of Constantius II.


367 CE
Picts, Scots, Saxons, and Franks attack the Roman Empire.


376 CE
The Visigoths are fleeing the Huns, entering the Eastern Roman Empire.


391 CE
Emperor Theodosius I closes pagan temples.


410 CE
Rome withdraws forces from Britain.


410 CE
The Romans withdraw from Britain.


426 CE
Roman Emperor Theodosius II orders closure of Epidaurus sanctuary.


439 CE
Vandals take Carthage from the Western Roman Empire and make it their new capital.


523 CE
Emperor Justinian seizes Caesarea.


565 CE
Death of Justinian I after 38 years ruling the Roman Empire.





Remove Ads
Advertisement







Free Newsletter
Our latest articles delivered to your inbox, once a week:



Are you a...?

History Enthusiast
Teacher
Student
Librarian













Remove Ads
Advertisement



 















Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including Oxford University.
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education, Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin), Merlot (California State University), OER Commons and the School Library Journal.
Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our old name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.








Our Mission
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.


Follow Us
Facebook












About •
Contact •
Advertise •
Privacy Policy •
Partners •
Supporters •
Newsletter •
Settings





World History Publishing is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.


Some Rights Reserved (2009-2024) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.


The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark.





Featured Partner












 










