



Empire - World History Encyclopedia
































































































 




Facebook





Membership
No ads













 








Encyclopedia

Index
Timeline
Maps
Book Reviews
Weights & Measures
Translations



Education

Teaching Materials
Link Database
Quizzes
Primary Sources
Collections
School Subscription



Media

Media Library
Audio Articles
Podcast
Youtube Channel



Contribute

Submissions
Needed Content
Style Guide
Terms & Conditions
Volunteer
Donate



Shop

Books
Map Posters
Magazines
Wall Charts
Clothing



About

About
Our Team
Editorial Policy
Annual Reports
Membership
Contact



Login

Login
Register








Empire









Contents




Definition







by Peter Davidson
published on 11 May 2011



 








Available in other languages: French, Portuguese, Turkish











Roman Empire in 117 CEAndrei nacu (Public Domain)



An Empire is a political construct in which one state dominates over another state, or a series of states. At its heart, an empire is ruled by an emperor, even though many states in history without an emperor at their head are called "empires".
What is an Empire?
At its core, an empire is the domination of one state by another. This idea lies at the heart of the common use of the term 'empire' and is as old as state-building itself. The earliest city-states tried to grow by taking over their neighbours. Where they succeeded, a single larger state might form, but more often the aggressor became a core state holding sway over a number of semi-independent peripheral states – a halfway stage to a larger state. This core state became more than merely the strongest in the region.
Remove Ads
Advertisement




Book Extract


Atlas of Empires
by Peter Davidson
This article is an extract from the book Atlas of Empires, republished with permission. This book tells the story of how and why the great empires of history came into being, operated and ultimately declined, and discusses the future of the empire in today's globalized world.
Buy on Amazon Buy on Bookdepository






YouTube
Follow us on YouTube!


An empire is an unequal relationship between a core state and a periphery of one or more states controlled from the core.
Sparta was the leader of a league of states but had little interest in interfering with their domestic politics. Athens, by contrast, also led a league but forced a supervised Athenian-style democracy on its supposedly independent members. Sparta was a hegemonic state, the strongest of a group, while Athens was interventionist and thereby imperial. The fact that Athens replaced tyrants with democratic government did not affect the imperial nature of this relationship.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



Empires & Control
An empire is an unequal relationship between a core state and a periphery of one or more states controlled from the core. On the simplest level, control means military occupation or other formal political intervention, but it can also cover informal economic or cultural influence. Economic pressure by itself has frequently been enough to manipulate governments. Religion, ideology or other cultural forces have habitually accompanied political or economic persuasion.


  


Neo-Assyrian EmpireNingyou (Public Domain)




The culture of the periphery, however, can exert its own pull and threaten to absorb a conquering power, most famously in the case of the Mongol conquest of China. As such, cultural imperialism is not a necessary component of empire.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



In fact, neither is cultural difference per se, given the difficulty of deciding where one culture ends and another begins. In the modern era, the borders of the nation state have tried to settle this matter, but the nation state itself formed around a core state that standardized language and other aspects of culture in a way that typically alienated outlying regions. In the end, the acid test for cultural identity has remained solidarity in the face of a common enemy and this is a test most empires have at some stage passed.
Core & Periphery
To explain how empires, thus defined, have risen, persisted and fallen over the millennia, the core, the periphery and the international situation each need to be examined.


  


Aztec Empirewikipedia user: El Comandante (CC BY-SA)




The core state is the place to look to find various motives for expansion, from the dream of imposing an imperial peace on squabbling states to the desire for economic exploitation, lust for the glory of conquest or zeal for evangelism, religious or ideological.
Remove Ads
Advertisement



The periphery is the place to look for crucial resistance or collaboration. Specifically, the fates of many empires have hinged on peripheral leaders deciding where their best interests lay. Often, the core can provide an account of an empire's rise, while the periphery better explains its persistence.
Examples of Empires in the ancient world include those of Sumeria, Babylonia, Assyria, that of the Hittites, the Egyptian, the Persian, the Macedonian, the Inca, the Aztec, and, most famously, the Roman.


Did you like this definition?







Related Content
Books
Cite This Work
License



Editorial Review
This article has been reviewed by our editorial team before publication to ensure accuracy, reliability and adherence to academic standards in accordance with our editorial policy.




Remove Ads
Advertisement



 
Translations
French Portuguese Turkish We want people all over the world to learn about history. Help us and translate this definition into another language!


Questions & Answers

What is considered an Empire?
An empire is an unequal relationship between a core state and a periphery of one or more states controlled from the core. On the simplest level, control means military occupation or other formal political intervention, but it can also cover informal economic or cultural influence.
Who runs an Empire?
At its heart, an empire is ruled by an emperor, even though many states in history without an emperor at their head are called "empires". For example the sovereign of the British Empire was a king or queen, not an emperor or empress.





Related Content

Filters:
All 
Definitions38
Articles39
Images12
Videos3
Collections6
Teaching Materials1













Definition 
Roman Empire


The Roman Empire, at its height (c. 117), was the most extensive... 











Definition 
Western Roman Empire


The Western Roman Empire is the modern-day term for the western... 











Definition 
Empire of Nicaea


The Empire of Nicaea was a successor state to the Byzantine Empire... 











Definition 
Byzantine Empire


The Byzantine Empire existed from 330 to 1453. It is often called... 











Definition 
Mali Empire


The Mali Empire (1240-1645) of West Africa was founded by Sundiata... 











Definition 
Songhai Empire


The Songhai Empire (aka Songhay, c. 1460 - c. 1591) covered what... 




1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Next › Last » 








Free for the World, Supported by You
World History Encyclopedia is a non-profit organization. For only $5 per month you can become a member and support our mission to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.
Become a Member  
Donate


 

Recommended Books











How to Hide an Empire: A History of the Greater United States


Written by Immerwahr, Daniel, published by Picador (2020)


$13.59















Empire, Incorporated: The Corporations That Built British Colonialism


Written by Stern, Philip J., published by Belknap Press: An Imprint of Harvard University Press (2023)


$32.55















Underground Empire: How America Weaponized the World Economy


Written by Farrell, Henry & Newman, Abraham, published by Henry Holt and Co. (2023)


$20.80















You Dreamed of Empires: A Novel


Written by Enrigue, Álvaro & Wimmer, Natasha, published by Riverhead Books (2024)


$23.46















Empire of the Summer Moon: Quanah Parker and the Rise and Fall of the...


Written by Gwynne, S. C., published by Scribner (2011)


$15.99






 
World History Encyclopedia is an Amazon Associate and earns a commission on qualifying book purchases.


Add External Link
External Links



Governors, diplomats and soldiers in the service of Sargon II and Tiglath-pileser III, kings of Assyria 


ucl.ac.uk 
 


Cite This Work

APA Style


Davidson, P. (2011, May 11). Empire.
World History Encyclopedia. Retrieved from https://www.worldhistory.org/empire/ 



Chicago Style


Davidson, Peter. "Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. Last modified May 11, 2011.
https://www.worldhistory.org/empire/.




MLA Style


Davidson, Peter. "Empire."
World History Encyclopedia. World History Encyclopedia, 11 May 2011. Web. 02 Mar 2024.





License & Copyright

Edited excerpt of Atlas of Empires by Peter Davidson. ©2011 New Holland Publishers (UK) Ltd. Republished with permission.
Original definition by Peter Davidson. Submitted by Jan van der Crabben, published on 11 May 2011. The copyright holder has published this content under the following license: Copyright. You cannot use, copy, distribute, or modify this item without explicit permission from the author. Please note that content linked from this page may have different licensing terms.






Remove Ads
Advertisement






Add Event Timeline
Visual Timeline


2500 BCE
First Dynasty of Lagash under King Eannutum is first empire in Mesopotamia.


2334 BCE - 2279 BCE
Sargon of Akkad (the Great) reigns over Mesopotamia and thus creates the world's first empire.


1504 BCE - 1492 BCE
Egyptian empire reaches greatest extent under Thutmose I.


1500 BCE
Egyptian empire extends to the Euphrates.


1350 BCE - 1250 BCE
The Hittite Empire is at its peak.


1285 BCE
Peak of Hittite power.


188 BCE
Maximum extent of the Pergamon Empire after Apamea peace.


12 Jul 100 BCE - 15 Mar 44 BCE
Life of Gaius Julius Caesar, founder of the Roman Empire.


31 BCE
Greece absorbed into Roman Empire.


60 CE - 61 CE
Boudicca's Revolt in Britain.


83 CE
Battle of Mons Graupius in Scotland.


200 CE - 1000 CE
Tiwanaku Empire flourishes based around Lake Titicaca.


c. 500 CE - 1240 CE
The Ghana Empire dominates West Africa.


802 CE - 1431 CE
Khmer Empire in South East Asia.


c. 1425 CE - 1532 CE
The Inca Empire flourishes in South America.





Remove Ads
Advertisement







Free Newsletter
Our latest articles delivered to your inbox, once a week:



Are you a...?

History Enthusiast
Teacher
Student
Librarian













Remove Ads
Advertisement



 















Numerous educational institutions recommend us, including Oxford University.
Our publication has been reviewed for educational use by Common Sense Education, Internet Scout (University of Wisconsin), Merlot (California State University), OER Commons and the School Library Journal.
Please note that some of these recommendations are listed under our old name, Ancient History Encyclopedia.








Our Mission
Our mission is to engage people with cultural heritage and to improve history education worldwide.


Follow Us
Facebook












About •
Contact •
Advertise •
Privacy Policy •
Partners •
Supporters •
Newsletter •
Settings





World History Publishing is a non-profit company registered in the United Kingdom.
World History Foundation is a non-profit organization registered in Canada.


Some Rights Reserved (2009-2024) under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike license unless otherwise noted.


The World History Encyclopedia logo is a registered trademark.





Featured Partner












 









